---
title: "Origin of the Collision Coefficients"
date: 2020-10-04
tags: [
    "Collision Coefficients",
    "Light Scattering",
    "Optics",
    ]
draft: true
---

We have previously discussed the [radiative transfer equation](/post/analytic-media/) \[[1](#references), [2](#references)\] and its connection to [light scattered by small particles](/post/particle-volume/) \[[3](#references), [4](#references)\] in some detail. If the distribution of particles is known, once we obtain the efficiencies (and the phase function) of the individual particles, we can readily compute the volume collision coefficients (and the aggregate phase function) that determine the outcome of the radiative transfer process. However, so far, little has been said about the nature and the origin of these coefficients.

To give an example, consider the following problem of atmospheric radiative transfer. We wish to simulate a clear blue sky created by Earth's atmosphere. What should our coefficients be set to?

"The sky is blue, so the RGB color coefficient must be blue as well", you may say. While the answer is not completely wrong, unfortunately, it leaves the problem underspecified. For one, we have not one, but several collision coefficients - absorption, scattering and attenuation (or extinction). Secondly, we can represent them (as a set) in several different ways. We may decide to use an "artist-friendly" parametrization, such as the combination of the single-scattering albedo and the mean free path. Unfortunately, using a blue albedo and an (arbitrarily) large mean free path will not produce the expected result, particularly at sunset.

While we may spend more time and energy trying various different combinations of parameters to determine what works and what doesn't, there is another way. A more fun way. The scientific way.

<!--more-->

The method can be briefly outlined as follows:

1. We describe radiation incident on the particle using Maxwell's wave theory of light.
2. We describe the shape, the size and the composition of the particle.
3. The incident wave interacts with the particle, producing a scattered wave.
4. Given the description of the incident and the scattered waves, we can compute the scattering and extinction efficiencies.

Since we will be treating light as a transverse wave, we must first make a brief acquaintance with the phenomenon of polarization.

## Polarization of Light

The idea behind [polarization of light](http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/phyopt/polarcon.html#c1) \[[4](#references) (ch. 5), [5](#references) (vol. I, ch. 33), [6](#references) (ch. 1.4), [7](#references), [8](#references) (p. 527-533), [9](#references), Chandra???\] (not to be confused with [polarization of matter](http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/electric/dielec.html#c1) \[[4](#references) (ch. 4.5), [5](#references) (vol. II, ch. 32), [6](#references) (ch. 2.3), [9](#references)\]) is simple. While scalar waves are characterized by the amplitude and the direction of propagation (in space and time), [transverse](http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/Sound/tralon.html) waves [[9](#references)] have an orientation as well.

One of the simplest ways to visualize a transverse wave is to consider a [harmonic electromagnetic plane wave](https://www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu/II_20.html) \[[4](#references) (ch. 4), [5](#references) (vol. II, ch. 20), [6](#references) (ch. 1.4.2), [7](#references) (pp. 5-7)\]. Mathematically, the reason to consider harmonic plane waves is that they form the simplest set of solutions of the wave equation.

So, what is a *plane wave*, exactly? While plane waves are often introduced using the [Fresnel's formulation of Huygen's principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Huygens%E2%80%93Fresnel_principle) \[[4](#references) (ch. 3.1)\], I will attempt to give another, (hopefully) simpler explanation.

Consider an infinitesimal (punctual) isotropic source of "disturbance". It generates spherical waves that can be imagined as spheres expanding at constant velocity. We can imagine these spheres to be composed of individual points. At a given point in time, all such points are at the same distance from the source. And if we fix a certain distance from the source, all points at this distance have been generated by the source at the same point in time. Loci of such points are said to form surfaces of constant *phase*, and these surfaces are called "wave fronts".

In the case of plane waves, surfaces of constant phase are planes rather than spheres. While there are multiple ways to generate plane waves, one mathematical trick is to imagine an infinitesimal isotropic source at infinity. Then the curvature of the spherical wave approaches 0, and, locally, we may consider a small section of the spherical wave front to be planar.

By *harmonic*, we mean that the amplitude of the wave is a [harmonic function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harmonic_function) of space and time. For a plane scalar wave traveling along the \\(z\\)-axis, the *amplitude* of the "disturbance" at the time \\(t\\) can be mathematically described [^1] as

[^1]: We use the "classic" sign convention of the authors cited.

$$ \tag{1} u(z,t) = u\_0 \cos(\omega t - k z + \delta), $$

where \\(u\_0\\) is the real maximum amplitude, \\(\omega = 2 \pi \nu\\) is the angular frequency, \\(k\\) is the [complex wavenumber](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wavenumber#Complex), and \\(\delta\\) is the phase offset.

If we define the complex maximum amplitude \\(u\_\delta = u\_0 e^{i \delta}\\), it leads to the complex notation \[[7](#references) (p. 13)\]

$$ \tag{2} u(z,t) = \mathrm{Re} \Big\lbrace u\_\delta e^{i (\omega t - k z)} \Big\rbrace. $$

If the ambient medium has a [complex index of refraction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Refractive_index#Complex_refractive_index) (IOR) \\(\eta - i \kappa\\), the complex wavenumber is given as

$$ \tag{3} k = k\_0 (\eta - i \kappa)
			 = \frac{2 \pi}{\lambda\_0} (\eta - i \kappa)
			 = \frac{\omega}{c} (\eta - i \kappa), $$

where \\(k\_0\\) and \\(\lambda\_0\\) are the real wavenumber and wavelength in vacuum, respectively, and \\(c\\) is the speed of light.

Substitution gives Equation 2 a more explicit form:

$$ \tag{5} u(z,t) = \mathrm{Re} \Big\lbrace u\_\delta e^{i (\omega t - (\omega / c) (\eta - i \kappa) z)} \Big\rbrace
			      = e^{-\kappa (\omega z / c) } \mathrm{Re} \Big\lbrace u\_\delta e^{i \omega t - i \eta (\omega z / c)} \Big\rbrace. $$

The first thing to notice is that \\(\omega t\\) and \\(\omega z / c\\) are both measured in radians. Secondly, we have two components - a real component followed by a real part of a complex component. Looking closely, the role of the complex IOR becomes more apparent. The real part of the IOR, \\(\eta\\), reduces velocity of the wave by scaling[^2] \\(\omega z / c\\). The imaginary part of the IOR - the *absorption index* \\(\kappa\\) - corresponds to [attenuation with distance](https://www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu/I_31.html) \[[5](#references) (vol. I, ch. 31)\].

[^2]: Note that the \\(\omega t\\) factor is unaffected.

## Acknowledgments

Wenzel Jakob

## References

<!--- APA style, with the edition and the (original publication) date at the end -->

1. Golubev, E. [Sampling analytic participating media](/post/analytic-media/). (2020).
2. Chandrasekhar, S. [Radiative transfer](https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.49707633016). (1950).
3. Golubev, E. [From particle to volume scattering](/post/particle-volume/). (2020).
4. van de Hulst, H. C. [Light scattering by small particles](https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.49708436025). (1957).
5. Feynman, R. P., Leighton, R. B., & Sands, M. [The Feynman lectures on physics](https://www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu/). (1963).
6. Born, M., & Wolf, E. [Principles of optics](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139644181), 7th edition. (1999).
7. Collett, E. [Field Guide to Polarization](https://doi.org/10.1117/3.626141). (2005).
8. Hansen, J. E., & Travis, L. D. [Light scattering in planetary atmospheres](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00168069). (1974).
9. Nave, C. R. [HyperPhysics](http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/index.html). (2017).
